---
title: "Implementation is Everything in Transit"
date: "2020-08-17"
tags: "transit|modes"
---

Welcome back everyone! I hope people are doing well as the summer drags on, I have quite a nasty affliction going on right now and I can barely speak but, my typing continues unincumbered!

## A Common Question

I've noticed a pattern I want to address in questions / comments I get about various transit systems:

- It sucks that they built that as an LRT, they should have built a metro!
- Such and such city is great, it has a full subway system!
- LA has such a big regional rail network!
- Shouldn't this have been an LRT instead of a BRT?

It seems a lot of people questions comments and concerns about transit end up being about the mode. People in the subway camp want a subway, people in the urban progressive camp want an LRT, people in the railfan camp want a big North American commuter railway. Whats also true is everyone wants to know whether a certain mode is "right" for a certain corridor and location. Theres a big fallacy in a lot of these questions and arguments and I want to address it in this post.

## Why Implementation is Everything

I think my point can best be summed up by this example - It's often argued or at least implied in transit circles (or transit enthusiast circles) that the higher capacity modes are "better", the RER's are better than the Metros, the Metros are better than the LRT's and on and on. However, while this might actually be an interesting heuristic to apply to places where transit is doing much better, the truth is European and Asian methodologies for approaching thinking about transit fundamentally don't work in North America (at least not broadly). The issue is the quite frequently there is a phenomenon which we see across almost all modes in the United States and Canada (although particularly in the US) where transit operators opt for larger vehicles just so they can cut costs and reduce service. I remember first really experiencing this backwards approach to delivering transit while waiting for a bus in York Region north of Toronto, while the route I was on was a major street the service was pitifully infrequent especially considering it was a weekday. This particular day it was pouring rain and me and my partner had the oh so pleasant experience of trying to share a standard sized bus shelter with around 15 other waiting riders for a bus which seemingly never came. However, when the bus arrived, to my utter astonishment it was a large premium articulated unit. This took me for a loop initially since the common logic I had grown up with in my home city of Vancouver was that you only ran a bigger bus when you had the frequency and patronage that *necessitated* them. Infrequent or community routes got the small "shuttle" style buses while the major thoroughfares got 40ft or 60ft models. This issue unfortunately is pretty systemic across North America, and it applies to rail systems as well unfortunately.

Some good examples of systems where this is an issue include BART and the Washington DC Metro, beautiful systems with very modern signalling and pretty great coverage but, both with a very dangerous feature in North America - long platforms. You see, where I live and grew up in Vancouver the *long* SkyTrain platforms are 80m and we have yet to even see trains in used that use all of them. One line in Vancouver, the Canada Line has platforms which are just 40m long. Now while to some in other countries, these short platforms may seem like a huge negative restriction, the truth is in North America they are a blessing in disguise. Since the trains are forced to be short, they need to be operated frequently and this leads to SkyTrain having some of the most frequent regular train services in the world despite Vancouver being a relatively small city. I think in the long term this is even better because while in other places with more "room to grow" built into their systems, operators might not be forced to consider new routes, in Vancouver they will become an inevitability - meaning more of the city is covered by transit as numerous *relief* lines are built to parallel existing corridors. Now if you haven't guessed it, BART and DC Metro's long platforms (among other things) enable the systems to run very long high capacity trains but, at mind numbingly infrequent intervals of more than every 15 minutes and as much as every 30 or 40 minutes in some cases. When you get service like that, no wonder people want to buy a car or even two.

So despite both Vancouver and the Bay Area / Washington DC technically using the same class of transit solution (a grade separated metro) the outcomes are very different because Vancouver's implementation of the system forces high frequencies and better service for passengers.

## An Aside, building Barriers to North Americanisms into our Transit (The Ford Brothers Secret Rescue of the Eglinton LRT)

What you may have picked up on is that by creating certain conditions which might be otherwise considered suboptimal (shorter platforms => lower long-term capacity) Vancouver actually made it so that the institutional and political problem of fighting for frequent service could be avoided - no politician will be popular if the transit users they represent are on packed vehicles *and* it's easy to build support for a crammed service among even car users and more free market types since *clearly* the service is working if its jammed to the brim with people. I find this a suprisingly elegant way with which Vancouver's hard infrastructure actually leads to better service outcomes and overall a better and more attractive system to use.

I think that this example is far from the only one that applies as well, even in the Canadian context. I've spoken a lot about the Eglinton Crosstown LRT in Toronto, a very strange project which acts as a Hybrid between a Subway and a Surface LRT albeit without the benefits of either (high cost of a subway, poor reliability and service of an LRT - at least on the whole). Unfortunately, despite the city of Toronto being inundated for over a decade with calls that the previous attitude of subways everywhere was bad, when the time came to show the city what LRT could really do the city failed and now the Eglinton Crosstown LRT as of today will not feature *any* signal priority, meaning a single left turning car may be able to force a train carrying 600 passengers to wait an extra 20 seconds, wasting 3 hours of time between all the passengers so that one driver could save a minute. The city of Toronto not giving surface LRT signal priority and the lack of debate over this issue probably shows better than anything else that LRT supporters in Toronto (at least those on the political stage) care more about what LRT represents (taking lanes away from cars) than actually providing a good service. This means that ironically the old Ford brothers adage of "subways, subways, subways" might actually have something to it after all, even if it was pushed by politicians who seemingly see transit as a lower priority.

Of course I would prefer that the line be elevated at least in the areas of Eglinton where the line is going to run on the surface, as it would be more cost effective than a subway while being much faster and more reliable than an at grade LRT. The crazy thing is that the writing has been on the wall for this project, Toronto has transit signal priority in a number of locations including on streetcar lines (where the argument for TSP is *slightly* weaker) and yet it seems to be very poorly implemented, rarely effective in speeding up journeys, and alltogether not nearly agressive enough to make a major difference. It should then come as no surprise that if Toronto could not get a relatively minor TSP implementation working for buses and streetcars, than frequently used agressive TSP on one of the cities most important thoroughfares was probably dead on arrival anyways. This means that strangely, by insisting and eventually succeeding on getting the core sections of the Eglinton Crosstown buried, the Ford brothers actually saved this project (the core tunneled section will be by far the highest quality part of the line and sets up more grade separation to the West (though again - elevated please)), these are not conclusions most people would expect but, I think they show how counterintuitive some of the political nature of our discussions around transit can be.

This shows that yet again, the implementation or failure of implementation of this transit project is likely what will break it. It also shows that implementing the right things matters; politicians and bureaucrats have tried long and hard to differentiate Streetcars and Toronto's new LRT, however as it turns out while they may be painted different colors once riders on an LRT train get stuck behind their first car or cross traffic movement, they will probably come to the conclusion that the Fords were right all along and that LRT's really *are* just "fancy streetcars".

So about baking in these anti-North Americanism features, in Vancouver's case it was short platforms to necessitate good service, in Toronto's it would be grade seperating lines (above *or* below ground) to take the control of whether the system can run frequently and reliably out of the hands of politicians and traffic services. I also see a similar pattern emerging in Montreal with the REM project when comparing it to the GO RER megaproject but, that will be a discussion for another day . . .  

## A Good Bus is better than a bad Metro

The crazy thing is that in North America we are sort of blessed with options, in many places cars are so popular that its unlikely transit demand will be massive any time too soon and so we have the benefit of the choice of various modes from *light* metro systems, to LRT's to BRT's which can run at very high capacities on our wide roads. This also means we need to think harder than our counterparts in more transit friendly parts of the world how to make our transit systems better and of course it starts with implementation.

Imagine you have two options to get to a station along a transit line in one of the previously mentioned regions with super infrequent rail. The rail or a new frequent semi-prioritized bus line; in my opinion the bus would provide a better experience to riders every time.

Since the buses would run frequently (say every 5-7 minutes), you would maintain similar capacity to your large train coming half hourly, you'd also attract riders with more transit street presence, but also with the security of more people, guranteed access to mobile internet so riders could use their phones, no need to worry about a schedule, and the perception that even if the trip took the same amount of time or even longer as waiting for the train and then doing a quick trip to your destination - that your trip was faster or more productive because you were in motion for more of it.

Things get even better when you consider that in 35 minutes (the amount of time your bus might have to travel if you waited the maximum amount of time and just missed the last one) that in many cases your bus would get to your final destination before your train even showed up, even if it had a much lower overall speed - an important reminder that headways have big travel time benefits when they are tight.

Truth be told we can already see examples of "inferior" modes outperforming "superior" ones out in the wild. For example consider the super BRT services of places like Mexico City and Guangzhou which when compared to a North American LRT provide more service patterns, more frequency, and even express services and possibly even more capacity. Another example would be the Ottawa LRT or *yes* even some Toronto bus and streetcar lines which provide better service and sometimes even better capacity than the oft-infrequent heavy rail of the United States. 

## Conclusion

As I hope I have made clear, in transit and especially in North American transit, implementation *matters*. A good bus can beat a bad LRT and a great LRT can beat a half-decent subway, by detaching ourselves from modes we can focus more on the service and the people which are what really matters anyways! 
