---
title: "Why Parking is bad . . . and how I would design the perfect parking lot"
date: "2020-09-03"
tags: "parking|cars|cities|climate"
---

Welcome back to the blog! This post was meant to go up yesterday but frustratingly I accidentally deleted the file (it happens to the best of us, even the professional software engineers). Before we get started I want to give a huge shoutout to Jonathan Douglas for supporting the blog and helping us remain ad free. Now, onto the main content!

# Why are you talking about parking!?

Suprisingly, some of my viewers either don't understand why I dislike parking lots (surface ones in particular) or actively like parking lots (don't ask me for justification!) - this shocked me a little and I wanted to write this so that I can put in one place all my thoughts on parking in one place (and the issues that exist with it).

## Parking

If you live in North America or can use Google Maps, you have probably noticed that plenty of North American cities (the vast majority) are inundated with surface parking, particularly in the suburbs or outskirts of the cities where it's common to see wide streets flanked on boths sides with massive parking lots for big box stores, or malls which take up a relatively minor part of a giant plot of land, the rest of which is filled with parking. Cities like Edmonton and Houston, which are not really known for having excellent transit, even have large swaths of their downtown cores filled with surface level parking lots, AND this effect still exists in cities like Vancouver and Toronto, both of which still have some large surface parking lots in their cores, albeit not as widespread as the cities I mentioned before.

Now, if you haven't already realized, when I am talking about surface parking I am referring to lots, not on-street parking. Don't get me wrong, on-street parking is generally not a good thing either, but it is a different and separate issue to actual purpose-built parking in my mind, so I will likely discuss it at a later date.

### The issues

- Surface Parking lots are space inefficient, the space needed to park less than 20 cars can support a high quality bus stop or set of stops, and such buses can carry an order of magnitude more people. Now, you may respond that people often need to bring their car shopping in North America for large grocery purchases every week or two or for large items. The truth is, this just highlights another underlying inefficiency, usually a large number of drivers especially at a mall are not going to come out with a car load of items, meaning they didn't NEED to drive if transit was provided to them. From this, it's probably worth analyzing the issues with massive trips to grocery stores necessitated by their distance from residential areas or the benefits of having companies deliver large orders with purpose built efficient vehicles (being used all day rather than being parked). But then again, this is a discussion for another day.
- Surface Parking creates a vicious cycle by encouraging the style of consumption and car use described above, which only leads to the "need" for parking being further cemented in peoples minds.
- By definition, parking lots are for vehicles at rest, whereas with delivery trucks, the vehicles are in motion much more often so less is needed. With private cars and businesses trying to accomodate them, every business needs its own big parking lot for all the potential customers they may want at one time.
- Parked cars have almost zero value, they are essentially being stored - nobody would buy a car that could not move, so space dedicated to a parked car is very unproductive in its own right.
- Parking lots are *dangerous*, many still to this day are not remotely accessible to people who are mobility impaired (or not!), many feature no pathways or sidewalks so that people (even those who just drove here) can walk seperately from cars. This leads to a lot of risk of people being hit, especially since most parking lots require drivers to back up at least 50% of the time when they are actually parking. When parking lots are full or if it, say, snows, these problems are exacerbated, and it actually means that for many people (including myself) a full parking lot is a very stressful environment since there are many pedestrians, potentially fast moving cars and more. This is even worse because if a parking lot is ever actually coming close to matching demand it is very uncomfortable, and I suspect this is why we so often see parking lots which are from 30-60% empty, they get overbuilt to provide more space and comfort to drivers.
- Parking lots are bad for the environment - from a high level parking lots encourage private car use. Even if this is EV use it's still going to be less efficient (though potentially less polluting) than using mass transit. This leads to a lot of unecessary energy used, which impacts the climate in what is ultimately GHG emissions in most cases. Parking lots also have major negative impacts on the local environment. As mentioned before, they often take up 50% or more of the footprint of even a single level store or shopping centre development (single floor buildings being less space efficient themselves of course), which means that more land needs to be levelled for each development. Most parking lots also lead to significant runoff since water can not be absorbed across the space, and as such it gets concentrated and can lead to flooding. Perhaps worst of all in my eyes is the heating effect:since parking lots tend to be dark colored and large (and unshaded) they tend to heat up during hot days and raise the temperatures, which contributes in a big way to the urban heat island effect.
- Parking lots make access without a car a nightmare. As mentioned before, most parking lots do not feature pedestrian or bike paths, and so every time a pedestrian wants to come off a sidewalk adjacent to a road to enter a business surrounded by parking they need to walk through the large parking lot and risk getting hit. This can have a big impact on how much people want to walk or cycle, since in many cases parking lots can be over 100m's deep, and due to the low density of stores and services pedestrians will be able to visit less businesses total, leading to business consolidation as well as a general reduction in pedestrian and cycling patronage.
- Finally, parking lots are simply ugly. Pavements are hard and dark grey or black, vegetation is usually very minimal, the space is generally quite barren, trash and other items are often all over the place, and there is little visual intrigue or diversity. Now, some might point to a parking lot yhsy is "nice" as it features paths or plants, but yet again the nice parts are the parts that *are not* parking!

### Some Solutions

To some of these problems there are some pragmatic solutions to making parking lots suck less. However, nothing fundamentally redeems what I see as a waste of spac,e which is unecessary in many places or at least would be if we implemented the right policies with regard to mobility.

- Multilevel parking can fix some issues of inefficiency. However, there is often a minimum threshold of space required, parkades are more likely to stay long term cemementing car use, parkades also lead to more cars in a small space which can lead to congestion and again encourages car use, and lastly, parkades also tend to be ugly, albeit slightly less ugly than surface parking lots in my eyes since they do not take up as much space. Parkades do have a few positives: they provide shelter, they are purpose-built and quite intentional, and so hypothetically should be easier to deploy EV charging into (which is a case where a parked car might actually have some value), they an also more easily have solar panels integrated as well as features such as green walls or at a minimum a smart facade to hide the building's purpose. It's also generally been my experience that parkades are more accessible with things like paths and elevators, likely because regulations are more strict on them since they are structures.
- Incorporating path systems into parking lots along with agressive traffic calming (flat raised pathways where cars must slow down to pass over rather than pathways which angle down when they cross a driveway) can certainly improve safety, and even how miserable being in a parking lot feels, but this means less cars can be stored in the same space which is a big negative if we cannot convince businesses not to grow their parking lots at the same time.
- Force developers to build transit exchanges and peestrian connections on major developments like shopping centers that gives transit the closest spot to actual buildings.
- Incorporate cool pavements (white painted pavement). This solution does work to reduce temperatures, but seems like it would require a lot of maintenance and is about as "lipstick on a pig" as it gets.
- Incoproate improved drainage through wide and well planted bioswale. This helps reduce flood risks and environmental harm long term if designed well and improves the look of a parking lot, but it is mostly incompatible with parking structures and requires a surface parking lot. It also can include trees to provide shade, allow some animals like birds to nest and cool down the space, however none of these solutions are optimal.
- Permeable pavements. Things like pavers with large gaps for drainage or other materials can reduce water runoff, but can increase maintenance and initial cost and would likely make them unpopular.
- Rearrange developments to put parking at the rear when fronting a street. This make access from transit and for pedestrians coming off the street easier and only slightly inconveniences drivers who need to drive a tiny amount further.
- Pushing parking underground can be a decent option, but it is often unpopular due to cost. This means that when land is scarce developers would usually actually prefer putting in less parking (city center), which is why policies like parking minimums are so bad. In areas where there is lots of space developers are likely to not want to spend the money putting parking underground, but know they need it because of the large number of drivers they think they need to attract. In these latter cases, we should pressure developers to bury parking or at the very least raise their development one level and provide parking underneath, such that it can still be easily pedestrian accessible without being ugly.

# How I would design a parking lot

For my parking lot, I would want extensive paths and green space for whatever the given size was: this would lead to a low amount of car stalls in what I would choose to make a surface lot. The low number of stalls would lead to congestion for drivers reducing their desire to park, we would provide clear alternatives for pedestrians and cyclists using pathway systems and they would be kept safe from the congested but limited psrking. Of course, I would also incorporste bioswales for run off and permeable pavement for its better drainage. Finally, I would provide a transit exchange directly adjacent to the site we were accessing, with good connections to the pedestrian and cycling path networks.
The beauty of my parking lot is that as time goes by it would both encourage car users to switch to more sustainable modes making its current use "unstable", it would drive lots of users to sustainable modes and then when demand was finally there it could be easily redveloped into a more valuable use, perhaps providing a small amount of baseline underground parking.

# Outro

I hope you enjoyed this unusual post! Parking is bad and I think we should have much less of it, but like anything we need to work simultaneously on harm reduction as we work on reducing the overall number of parking lots. Of course, we will probably always have some amount of parking, but the goal should be both to drastically reduce the amount, and improve the parking we feel we *must* have!

Thanks for reading!
